Relational Data Concepts

In this lab, you will apply the concepts that you learnt in this module to a relational database schema called Car Dealership, which is designed to keep track of automobile sales in a car dealership.

Objectives:
After completing this lab, you will be able to:
1. Evaluate your knowledge of Relational Database Concepts and the Entity-Relationship (ER) Diagram
2. Imporve your understanding of terms related to relational models like entity, attribute, and keys.
  
Concepts covered in the lab
1. Entity: A person, place, object, or event about which data is stored (represented as a table in a database).
2. Attribute: A property or characteristic of an entity (represented as a column in a table).
3. Primary Key: A unique identifier for each row in a table.
4. Foreign Key: A field in one table that refers to the primary key of another table, creating a relationship between them.
5. Entity-Relationship (ER) Diagram: A diagram that shows entities (tables), attributes (columns), and the relationships between them.

Exercise
In this exercise, we will be working on a relational database schema called Car Dealership. A database has to be designed to keep track of automobile sales in a car dealership.

Now let us go through some questions based on the above database schema of Car Dealership and relational instance of SALE:

1. How many relations does the Car Dealership database schema contain?

Hint
A relation is also the mathematical term for a table.

Answer
The Car Dealership database schema contains the following 3 relations or tables: CAR, SALE, SALESPERSON.

2. How many columns does the relation Car contain?

Hint
A relation is also the mathematical term for a table. A table is a combination of rows and columns. The columns are the attributes, or fields.

Answer
The relation Car contains the following 4 columns: Serial_no, Model, Manufacturer, Price.
  
3. How many rows does the relation Sale contain?

Hint
A relation is also the mathematical term for a table. A table is a combination of rows and columns. The rows are the tuples.

Answer
5

4. Identify the attributes of the relation Salesperson.

Hint
A Relational Schema specifies the relation name and type of each of the columns, which are the attributes.

Answer
Salesperson_id, Name, Phone

5. Identify which relations of the Car Dealership database have primary keys. Name the primary keys if exist.

Hint
A primary key is a column or group of columns that uniquely identify every row in a relation/table. A table cannot have more than one primary key. Symbol representing a primary key may look like:

Answer
The relations CAR and SALESPERSON have primary keys. Serial_no is the primary key of the relation CAR. Salesperson_id is the primary key of the relation SALESPERSON.

6. Which table(s) in the Car Dealership database include foreign keys? Identify the foreign keys and describe the table and column they reference.

Hint
A foreign key is a column that establishes a relationship between two relations/tables. It acts as a cross-reference between two tables as it points to the primary key of another table. A table can have multiple foreign keys referencing primary keys of other tables. Symbol representing a foreign key may look like:

Answer
The relation SALE has foreign keys. Serial_no is a foreign key of the relation SALE which acts as a cross-reference between two relations CAR and SALE as it points to the primary key of the relation CAR. Salesperson_id is another foreign key of the relation SALE which acts as a cross-reference between two relations CAR and SALESPERSON as it points to the primary key of the relation SALESPERSON.

Summary
Congratulations!
You have completed this lab where you have evaluated your knowledge and improved your understanding of key terms pertaining to relational models.
  
Author(s)
Rav Ahuja
Sandip Saha Joy
